feat: allow templating of the extends field (#27955)
renovatebot/renovate: docs/usage/config-presets.md

}
```

## Templating presets

In order to provide flexible preset configurations, Renovate provides support using [templates](./templates.md) for preset names.

### Example use-case

The following example shows a self-hosted Renovate configuration for a company called "Renovators".
The company is split into multiple organisations `foo`, `bar` and `baz`, where each organisation provides its opinionated shareable preset.
Renovate is configured to load the preset of each organisation dynamically based on the repository path.

```javascript
module.exports = {

>   extends: ['local>{{ topLevelOrg }}/renovate'],

Reviewer: are you sure this will work?

Reviewer 2: I don't think it works currently as only `{}` is passed as the object

}
```

## Templating presets

> In order to provide flexible preset configurations, Renovate provides support using [templates](./templates.md) for preset names.

Reviewer 3: We use the word provide twice in the same sentence. Also, after reading, it's not clear what the reader can _do_ with this feature, or why they should care.

I'd like something like this:

You can use x to be flexible with your presets.
This can be handy when you want to do y.
Read link to docs to learn more.

Note how I'm using the word `you` to put the reader into the text.

Author: Thanks for the valuable feedback 🙌  I've applied your suggestions, please have a look.

### Example use-case

The following example shows a self-hosted Renovate configuration for a company called "Renovators".

> The company is split into multiple organisations `foo`, `bar` and `baz`, where each organisation provides its opinionated shareable preset.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The company is split into multiple organizations:

- `foo`
- `bar`
- `baz`

Each organization has its own opinionated shareable preset.
```

> Renovate is configured to load the preset of each organisation dynamically based on the `ORGANISATION_SLUG`environment variable.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Renovate is configured to load the preset of each organisation dynamically based on the `ORGANIZATION_SLUG`environment variable.
```

We use American English, which uses a z for words like organization. Please use the z form in the docs and the code.

```javascript
module.exports = {
  customEnvVariables: {

>     ORGANISATION_SLUG: process.env.ORGANISATION_SLUG,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    ORGANIZATION_SLUG: process.env.ORGANIZATION_SLUG,
```

  },

>   extends: ['local>{{ env.ORGANISATION_SLUG }}/renovate'],

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  extends: ['local>{{ env.ORGANIZATION_SLUG }}/renovate'],
```

}
```

## Templating presets

You can use [handlebars](https://handlebarsjs.com/) templates to be flexible with your presets.
This can be handy when you want to do include presets conditionally.

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
!!! note
    The template only supports a small subset of options, but you can extend them via `customEnvVariables`.

Read the [templates](./templates.md) section to learn more.

### Example use-case

The following example shows a self-hosted Renovate configuration for a company called "Renovators".

> The company is split into multiple organizations

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The company is split into multiple organizations:
```

- `foo`
- `bar`
- `baz`

> Each organization provides its opinionated shareable preset.

Reviewer 2: Isn't this use case satisfied by https://docs.renovatebot.com/self-hosted-configuration/#inheritconfig ?

Author: Hmm... I didn't know about this. So we probably would need to find another example, since `inheritConfig` does not cover the use-case of adding a dynamic reference ([see PR description](https://github.com/renovatebot/renovate/pull/27955#issue-2188579889)).

Author: @rarkins how about this use case:
Having a central Renovate preset (default.json) located in a repository `renovate/presets`. But actually before blindly pushing changes to main, it would be nice to validate the changes. This can be achieved by using templating:

```javascript
// config.js
module.exports = {
  customEnvVariables: {
    GITLAB_REF: process.env.CI_COMMIT_REF_NAME || "main",
  },
  extends: ["local>renovate/presets#{{ env.GITLAB_REF }}"]
}
```

I found an older discussion, which could benefit from this feature:
https://github.com/renovatebot/renovate/discussions/16108

Author: Updated the docs, please have another look.

}
```

## Templating presets

You can use [Handlebars](https://handlebarsjs.com/) templates to be flexible with your presets.
This can be handy when you want to include presets conditionally.

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
!!! note
    The template only supports a small subset of options, but you can extend them via `customEnvVariables`.

Read the [templates](./templates.md) section to learn more.

### Example use-case

> The following example shows a self-hosted Renovate preset located in a GitLab repository `renovate/presets`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following example shows a self-hosted Renovate preset located in a GitLab repository called `renovate/presets`.
```

```json
{
  "extends": ["local>renovate/presets"]
}
```

> Usually you want to validate the preset before blindly using it in your Renovate configuration.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Usually you want to validate the preset before you put it in your Renovate configuration.
```

> Here you can make use of templating to validate and load the preset on branch level:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Here is an example of how you can use templating to validate and load the preset on a branch level:
```

}
```

## Templating presets

In order to provide flexible preset configurations, Renovate provides support using [templates](./templates.md) for preset names.

### Example use-case

The following example shows a self-hosted Renovate setup (`config.js`) within a Git repository `my-org/renovate` of a self-hosted GitLab instance.
Additionally, there is a shareable config preset configured within the same repository (`default.json`).

Simplified repository tree

```
- .gitlab-ci.yml
- config.js
- default.json
```

Renovate is configured to use the shareable preset as a base configuration.

```javascript
module.export = {
  extends: ['local>my-org/renovate'],
};

> ```

Reviewer 2: It's unclear what is meant by this example. Is this meant to be the example of what not to do? Or a problem?

However, using this approach Renovate only loads the preset from the default branch of the repository (usually called `main`).
In case you want to apply changes to the preset, e.g. via opening a new merge-request, the changes should be validated to not break the Renovate setup (e.g. using the `renovate-config-validator`).
Here the templating can be used to create a dynamic reference, which can be used by Renovate to load the correct preset (else it would just load the preset from the default branch).

```javascript
module.exports = {
  customEnvVariables: {
    GITLAB_REF: process.env.CI_COMMIT_REF_NAME,
  },
  extends: ['local>my-org/renovate#{{ env.GITLAB_REF }}'],
};

> ```

Reviewer 2: Is this your actual use case?

I'm not sure if this will confuse users more than help them. i.e. the 99% who don't need this start wondering if they'll miss something.

I thought your use case was to be able to make the org name relative

Author: Sure I can add a more simple use case

Author: Sth. like this? Using a preset based on organisation:
```json
{
  "extends": [
    "config:recommended",
    "local>{{ env.ORG_SLUG }}/renovate"
  ]
}
```

Reviewer 2: your use case is that this used only with env variables?

Author: We can also use `topLevelOrg` for the use case mentioned above.
